Summary of Belarus memories of Tanya Mostkoff




Tatyana (Taiba) Izrailevna Mostkova = Tanya Moskoff, daughter of Israel and Shifra- remained in
Russia after family moved to Mexico. Izrailevna is patronymic for Israel and Mostkova is the
feminized version of family name.

Mentions fire- before/after probably during revolution 1918/1919. Born “7 or 8 years” prior, so
about 1911/1912.

Mother gave birth, perhaps to Mikhail born in 1917, “Lev” was born in 1914. Midwife was named
Keilya (Clara) or maybe Rosa. Mijkhail = Miguel Moskoff and Lev/Leb = Luis Moskoff

Older brother Abram was born about 3 years earlier (1908/1909) = Abraham Moskoff

Family was “created about 1908/1908”

Remembers Polish occupation. (NB-google: Following the Polish-Soviet War (1919-1920) and
the Treaty of Riga in 1921, a portion of Belarus, known as Western Belorussia, came under
Polish occupation, while the rest remained part of the Soviet Union)

Mentions Sadovaya Street and owner of house across street by name of Wolfson.

Lived there until 1928/1929, when father, Abram, mom and kids left.

Lived in the courtyard of the Wolfson house, next to “newly built synagogue on corner
surrounded by wooden fence”, with an “exit to the market”. House was about 20-40 meters
across from Slyuch (Slusk) river.

Living with family was cousins Masha and Nina. Mother took in after their own mother died in
Saratov from TB. Father was Isaac Bunin.(NB: Masha and Nina were likely second cousins,
once removed to Tanya- their mother was Tanya’s mother’s cousin making Masha and Nina
Shifra’s 2nd cousins)

The fact is that in the hungry 1920s, the family of my mother's cousin came to us from Saratov -
her husband and 2 girls Masha and Nina. Their mother died there of tuberculosis. They settled
with us temporarily and the girls, several years older than me, slept with me in this bedroom.
The girls' father left to get a job. That's what they say now, but more honestly he went to Minsk
to buy something and sell it here at a higher price, i.e. to earn money. Those were the years of
banditry. On the way back, the entire loaded horse-drawn convoy with goods was surrounded by
bandits, who tied everyone alive to a tree, doused them with kerosene and set them on fire.
That's how Isaac, the father of Masha and Nina Guitiyk, died. And the girls stayed with us
forever.

Pinkas of Slutsk: 229. Non-stop tearing over the terrible thing that has happened, "May G-D
have mercy on us", in the year 5682 the eve of Tuesday the second day of Shvat (31 January
1922). Ten men from the town of Minsk travelled here with merchandise. On the way on the
seventh hour in the evening murderers had fallen on them by the village Dalhinoveh not far from
the town Laseh, and killed seven men brutally and then burnt them. Three men survived,
wounded. They escaped to the town Ozdeh. And these are the dead: a. The martyr r' REUVEN
the son of r' BINYAMIN YALEVITZER twenty-eight years of age. b. The martyr r' YEHUDAH the
son of r' ZEV BAGUSHAV [...] years of age. c. The martyr r' YITSKHAK the son of r' MENDIL
BUNIN [...] years of age. d. The martyr r' AVRAHAM-CHAIM the son of r' [...] SHULMAN from
HARESK. e. The martyr r' REUVEN the son of r' YITSKHAK HALEVY KANTAROVITCH. Two
more men were buried in the town Laseh. The aforementioned martyrs were buried on Sunday
the seventh day of Shvat (5 February 1922) here in the cemetery. They rest by the martyr
URIYAH PERELMAN who was killed on Sunday the eleventh day of Tamuz 5681 (17 July
1921). They were buried according to the aforementioned order in row "martyrs" by the cave of
the "shaimes" south side. The entire town was shocked over this terrible disaster. May G-D do
only good and will never again rebuke in this way. May their souls be bound up in the bond of
everlasting life among the righteous souls, May death be consumed... Amen.




Tanya’s mother’s family was Polyak but she did not know where her family was. Polyaks were
“rich people”. Pesya Polak was Tanya’s grandmother. Pesya married a poor, but intelligent guy-
Nakhamani Korukhilmai (perhaps mistranslation of Boruchovich), with whom she had 11
children, only two of which survived to old age.

Pinkas: 201. On the holy day of Shabat the third day of Nisan (1 April 1922) passed away the
woman Mrs. PESHEH the daughter of the rabbi mh"r Y' MIKHAL POLAK the wife of r'
NAKHMAN BARUKHOVITCH. She rests by the woman Mrs. ZLATEH who passed away on
Wednesday the tenth day of the aforementioned Shvat (8 February 1922) row "twenty-seven"
b"k south side.

The family’s haberdashery shop was burned down during the revolution.



Grandmother Khaya lived with family. Khaya was the mother of Tanya’s father Isrol Moskov.
Tanya remembers Israel, her father, the youngest son born in 1880. Eldest daughter Taibe, son
Motel, daughter Ginda and youngest son Eizer (and others). She does not remember Khaya’s
husband (paternal grandfather) Leiba.
??870. On the aforementioned day the first day of "rosh-khodesh" Adar b' (3 March 1919)
passed away in an institution the elderly woman Mrs. CHAYA-HENYA the daughter of mh"r
DAVID the wife of r' ZEV VOLF ITSKOVITS from Oretesheh and she rests by the elderly
woman who passed away on the holy day of Shabat the fifteenth day of the aforementioned
Adar a' (15 February 1919) row "twenty-seven" b"k to the south side. Could this be Khaya?
The Iskovits name comes up in later paragraphs when Shifra is complaining to Israel and
Israel’s nephew. However, if this woman is Chaya Iskovits, then Israels’ paternal name would
be the same and not Mostkov.




Around the end of 1800’s Tanya’s older brothers (note, this probably should be “uncles”, and 15
year old “future dad” went to Mississippi, doing crafts, small trades and peddling.



Her dad, about aged 25 went back to Russia and became engaged to 27 year old future mother
(NB: Shifra) in about 1907. This would put Israel’s birthdate around 1882 with Shifra’s about
1880.



Shifra Nakhmanova Borukhovich was Tanya’s mother. Shifra’s father (Tanya’s maternal
grandfather lived near the city of Slutsk on the outskirts of Ostrov. Grandfather Nakhman and his
brother (Yenta Moiseyevna's father) studied in a cheder and then in a yeshiva - a higher
religious school.

Perhaps Movsha is Yenta’s father???


 BORUKHOVICH, Yenta     Movsha, ‑   3/1/1888   Bobruysk   -   Bobruysk   -

                        Feiga, ‑    2Shvat     Bobruisk       1888       -

                        ‑                      Minsk          F2         NHABMinsk/1520/7/1
 ORUKHOVICH, Iakha    Movsha,        17/8/1884    Bobru   Father        Bobruys   -
                      Abram                       ysk     registered    k
                                     -                    in Slutsk.              -
                      Feiga,                      Bobru   witnessing    1884
                      Bentsian                    isk     record has              NHABMinsk/1520/
                                                          not been      F37       7/3
                      ‑                           Minsk   preserved,
                                                          the record              95
                                                          taken later
                                                          in 1907




 BORUKHOVICH,         Movsha,        11/12/1885   Bobru   circumcisio   Bobruys   -
 Girsha               Borukh                      ysk     n was         k
                                     -                    performed               -
                      Feiglia, ‑                  Bobru   by            1885
                                                  isk     GALANT                  NHABMinsk/1520/
                      ‑                                   Khaim,        M202      7/3
                                                  Minsk   KHENKIN
                                                          Iser                    124




If this is indeed Nakhman’s brother, then Movsha also had children named Iakha and Girsha.
And Movsha and Nakhman’s parents were Abram and Benstian??

Grandma Pesya was given a textile shop as an inheritance, where she lasted only a short time
due to her poor health. According to stories, Grandma Pesya gave birth to 11 children, of whom
I knew three – my mother, the eldest and favorite daughter Shifra, and the youngest Malka and
Mikhail. The rest of the children were spoken of in whispers. One guy was mentally weak and
left home, they said, to go to sea, and never returned. The rest of the children died in childhood
from various illnesses. Pesya died of kidney disease.



Grandfather was a specialist in furs and other agricultural raw materials. I remember that in his
apartment there were always bunches of dried mushrooms, which smelled very delicious. They
brought him processed animal skins, and he smoothed them out, assessed them and, never
lying, told the true price. His word was law. Later, in the 20s, he was one of the first former
owners and small traders who was hired by the Soviet customs... as a specialist with a salary of
25 rubles a month, he was a member of the trade union, which was very honorable.
My mother was smart and businesslike. They said that once their house caught fire, and there
were valuable skins in the storeroom. Grandfather jumped up in the night, confused and began
to pray to God. My mother, in one nightgown, being already a bride, opened the window and
threw out all the goods, i.e. saved grandfather and all his fortune. My mother was drawn to
politics, to public life. She participated in mutual aid, was friends with the poor and impoverished
people, collected aid for them, and she herself helped everyone as much as she could.



She was friends with Khaya Rabinovich. Her husband was a very educated, but sick and
hunchbacked man, and this poor woman was forced to feed her entire large, gifted and poor
family alone. Mom helped them all the time, and in her difficult years she helped through people,
i.e. collected donations for them. My mother was not a member of the Bund party, but she was
close to them and close to the revolutionary movement. Why did such a nice and smart woman
stay a maid for so long? It happens. She had a man who loved her very much, but he was a
shoemaker and not a match for her - prestige. It was very important then - parents did not allow
her to take below her class. When Mom first met Dad, she was attracted by his dashing
appearance, composure, but his American character did not escape her gaze either. But the
time came to start a family, and they got married. Mom was given a small dowry - a
haberdashery shop with ties, buttons, ribbons, which stood in boxes not only in the shop, but
also under the bed at home.



Tanya remembers when dad, mom and dad's nephew - already a young man of 17-18 years old,
Tsukovich Israel, the son of the elder sister. Mom in bitter tears tells him that dad does not give
her money to live on and she has nothing to feed the children, and there were already four of
them then and soon a fifth appeared.



At some point, Tanya left to live with her grandfather after the death of Pesya. “until I was 16,
when I got on the Slutsk-Moscow train with a transfer, I think, in Osipovichi, Minsk and, I think,
Smolensk and arrived in the cobblestone - Belorussky railway station – Moscow”



A girl named Dveira-Dora, my father's niece, came to visit us. My mother was very, very kind
and pitied everyone. Some misfortune happened at home, maybe she was left an orphan and
was sent to us. She was beautiful and stately, and I was 10 years old. I was sent to the
pharmacy for medicine, and I was embarrassed to open the door, I sat on the street and did not
dare knock and open the door of the pharmacy – my uncle (my mother’s cousin Chaim Yudya)
worked there as a pharmacist. And so I sat. Then I ran home and lied that I had been there, that
there was no medicine, but they told me – no need anymore! I did not understand at first and
was even glad that it was not necessary. Looking at my mother’s gloomy face, I understood.
Dveira was already dead in the bedroom. She died of dysentery. I remember that my mother
was tearing her hair out, she was also pregnant. We children were strictly – strictly ordered not
to pick and eat apples. In August 1921, my mother gave birth to a daughter and she was named
Dveira (Dora).

Aunt Malka came from Moscow, she studied at the Krupskaya Academy. This was,
however, already in 1925, when I was 14 years old.

I would like to describe our life when I was 10-13 years old in my parents' family,
because then the family broke up, my father left, and my grandfather took me in. So, my
mother gave birth to the youngest - a girl Dveyra-Dora in August 1921. It was a sad
time. Our haberdashery shop burned down, and in general the small seller - my father,
already poor, ceased to exist.

Mentions friends Perla Rabinovich and other Rabinovich children, Khana, Sarochka and
Polinochka.

Wolfson’s youngest daughter was Bertochka.

Aunt Malka from Moscow and her younger brother Mikhail, who studied at the medical
institute in Leningrad and, without the consent of his parents and all his relatives,
suddenly married Khaya Pastron, a lively girl and, as they said around – not for him
(Genya’s mother).

My teacher was Mogilevsky Meilakh and we called him “teacher Meilakh”, He had a
niece – Liza Charnaya, who was my bosom friend, Liza’s father was a dentist.

I also looked for my second cousins ​Manya and Nina (Nekhamka) in Leningrad,

On January 22, 1924, in the evening, Aunt Malka came to us and told us that Lenin had
died.

 In this club I became friends with Lenochka Rabinovich, with Perlechka, my age, and her older
sister Sarrochka. The club's leadership included senior comrades, respected by us and very, very
committed to the cause of the club, such as Movshovich, Lisnyansky, Rabinobich.

The club's active members were Sara Rabinovich, Movshovich (Fanya Iosifovna's husband).


Slutsk 1911–1926
My school friend Etl Muhler and I are sitting on the terrace of their small wooden house and
studying

Sarah Rabinovich is coming.” Boris, their brother, was the pride of the family, and he was rarely
at home. Somewhere in the shtetl he had a fiancee, Tsilya.

My two aunts lived in Moscow – Enta Moiseyevna, who graduated from the Krupskaya
Academy, and Aunt Malka, my mother’s sister. The Pastrons also lived in Moscow – Genya
Borukhovich’s mother and her uncles and aunts.



I remember the manorial apartment on Proletarskaya Street. This apartment was confiscated
from the rich people who left the revolution and given to Boris for use.

The last thing I remember about my mother's house is my father's departure. We are all sitting in
the cart, my father, my mother and the five of us children. Dorochka is 4-5 years old. I am
already a young lady, I am a little ashamed to ride in the cart, but I understand that I have to be
with my mother, with the children and we are riding far away to the station, along Proletarskaya
Street, past our club. Several other men are riding with my father. They are riding from Russia to
Mexico, and my mother and we are staying behind.

The following year, several more families went to Mexico, and dad ordered Abram to be sent
with them, which mom did. He didn’t want to study, there was nowhere to work, and dad lived
alone there and he had to be helped to earn money. 4 Our family before dad’s departure, 1925.

One winter morning bitterness came to the house. Grandfather's son, beloved and only,
handsome and talented, an employee - an inspector of the Belarusian People's Commissariat of
Education in Minsk - committed suicide - hanged himself with a towel in his room. It was
difficult to find the reasons, but grandfather's grief knew no bounds. He cut all his clothes, sent
ashes to his gray head, sat on the floor and cried. My mother and aunt Malka got sick. His wife
and daughter Genya lived in Moscow. Malka graduated from the Academy. Krupskaya in
Moscow and was appointed inspector of education in Bobruisk. Her fiancé cheated on her - he
married her friend. By this time Faivel Kharak appeared, who loved Malku very much, was a
good, calm person,but could not extinguish the fire of suffering in Malka's soul. Faivel moved
into Grandpa's apartment to stay with him when I went to study in Moscow.

During the first winter holidays, and they were very short for me, I did not go home to Mom, but
... to some place near Minsk. Dveira Ostrovskaya, HIS older sister, lived there, who also
graduated from the Minsk Jewish Pedagogical College and worked there as a teacher
How much I've already heard about Moscow, and I'll live there, for now with Aunt Yenta, and
then I'll enroll, of course I'll have a dorm.

I leave for Moscow, 1926.




(Google) The Saratov Region is located in the southeastern section of
European Russia in the Lower Volga area. It borders on the Volgograd,
Voronezh, Tambov, Penza, Ulyanovsk, Samara and Orenburg regions; it
also shares a state border with Kazakhstan.
